Jacob Hoertt 720514988

**What is the cause of piracy in Somalia?**

Piracy is a form of organized crime that has been performed for
centuries in the open seas around the world. Piracy is the act of
attacking and robbing a ship of its valuables. The first documented
occurrences of piracy are thought to be ships being attacked in the
ancient Mediterranean Sea in 13^th^ century B.C. The late 17^th^ century
and early 18^th^ century is considered the golden age of piracy. This is
when many of the famous pirates who are portrayed in movies sailed the
seas. While piracy is not as prolific as it once was, it certainly is
still prevalent in some areas of the world, specifically the coast of
Somalia. Somalia is a country on the east coast of Africa that borders
the Gulf of Eden and the Indian Ocean. With access to waterways busy
with trade and the absence of a stable political government, piracy has
been a lucrative practice in Somalia since the early 1990’s ("Africa
Economic Institute : Pirates of Somalia", 2016). This modern day piracy
has become an international issue due to billions of dollars worth of
trade being disrupted, but the most important issue is a land-based one
in Somalia. Some people of Somalia claim that piracy is necessary to
feed their families and provides economic growth in their towns, but
piracy has cyclic, disruptive economic effects that lead to a dependence
on pirates for basic goods. These economic benefits also offer no
incentive for any of the towns on the coast of Somalia to enforce
anti-piracy legislation (Sterio, 2012). Piracy in Somalia is not
committed out of malice or greed, but is the result of a lack of
political or economic structure.

\

The circumstances that allow piracy stem from the lack of a central
government since 1991 in Somalia (Sterio, 2012). Somalia has been in a
constant state of civil war since 1991, leading to a few autonomous
political entities, but no true national government. Without a state
power to regulate anything, illegal European waste dumping and
overfishing by foreign vessels have crippled two of the most important
markets in Somalia.

\

Shortly after the collapse of the Somali government in 1991, European
ships began dumping toxic waste off by the boatload in Somali waters.
This has led to the poisoning of the Somali waters, making fishing less
profitable for local fishermen. Iranian, Yemeni, and European fishermen
also realized that with such little regulation in these waters, and a
large fish market, it was a prime location to commercially fish. Local
fishermen cannot compete with large foreign vessels that fish at night
and overfish. In 2011 there were reported estimates of up to 50% of the
annual overall catch in the western Indian Ocean was done illegally, and
some believe this number to be even higher in the largely unregulated
Somali waters ("Security Council United Nations Political Office for
Somalia", 2011). Al Jazeera reported in 2015 that foreign vessels take
three times as many fish from the Somali waters than local fishermen
(Hamza Mohamed, 2015). Many of the pirates in Somalia are former
fishermen who claim that piracy is their only way to support themselves
and their families (Hamza Mohamed, 2015). Fishermen possess skills,
knowledge, and equipment that allow them to use the seas to make a
living. There is a cause and effect relationship between the illegal
foreign fishing vessels and the number of Somali pirates. An elderly
woman, Hawa Mohamed Saeed, interviewed by Al Jazeera explains “They will
never arrest anyone for fishing illegally in Somali waters but will
arrest anyone for taking a gun to fight the trawlers”. The fact that
many are choosing to turn to piracy is a reflection of how desperately
Somalia needs a stable governing body to help regulate these waters.

\

Piracy provides an influx of cash to the coastal economies that have
been crippled by overfishing and the destruction caused by the Tsunami
in the Indian Ocean at the end of 2004. While the worst of this Tsunami
struck Southeast Asia, struggling Somali coastline communities were also
left devastated. The Tsunami claimed close to 300 Somali lives, also
destroying an estimated 800 buildings and 600 boats (Plaut, 2005). In a
country with no true state government, recovery without international
relief is nearly impossible.

\

Organizations like the UN have provided relief for the coastal villages
of Somali, but many have found piracy to be a sufficient substitute to
rebuild the economy. A study from 2005-2012 reported by the World Bank
claims that Somali pirates extracted up to \$385 million in ransom
(Mogadishu, 2011). The people who collect these ransoms do not just keep
all of this money for themselves; an intricate micro economy has formed
around this cash inflow. A United Nations report estimates that the
pirates only keep about 30% of the ransom they collect. 50% of the
ransom collected goes to foreign sponsors who often pay for the pirate’s
weapons and living supplies. 10% goes to bribing local officials and
gifts for the community, and 10% goes to their in-shore helpers (Plaut,
2005). Despite only a minority percentage going back to coastal
communities, the communities seem to believe they see direct benefits
from piracy. Pirates purchase supplies for themselves and their hostages
from local vendors, which is seen as a positive by local merchants since
the pirates are traditionally big spenders (Beloff, 2013). While this
initial rise in sales can be seen as a good thing for local business, it
does have some harmful long-term effects. The local economies have
experienced extreme inflation to the point where people who are not
pirates struggle to pay for basic goods. Some examples of this are
people of Somali paying \$25 for a pack of cigarettes, and \$10 for a
can of Coca-Cola (Beloff, 2013). The effects of piracy make it even more
attractive for other citizens on the coast to join in. They look around
and realize pirates are the only ones who can afford what they need, and
they can receive funding from sources abroad, so it creates an illusion
of piracy as a solution that leads to a feedback loop that perpetuates
piracy.

\

Local government not only turning a blind eye, but also benefitting from
piracy is an issue that will continue to encourage piracy. As mentioned
earlier, local clan leaders and warlords are receiving bribes from the
pirates, which they seem to believe is more beneficial than trying to
enforce international law. This creates a safe haven for piracy in the
Somali waters, since the incentive to ignore piracy seems to be greater
than that of trying to combat it. Piracy in Somalia is not something
that is well hidden, in fact, J. Peter Pham, an analyst from James
Madison University, says "Ninety percent of the Somali piracy occurs out
of two ports, [Eyl and Haraardheere].  We know where they are.  We even
know who the pirate leaders are because they use their fabulous wealth
to build huge and rather ostentatious mansions that are there for
everyone to see" ("VOA", 2015). While many countries complain of the
complications that piracy in this area causes with maritime trade, not
one specific country has spearheaded the real issue of trying to assist
the Somali people in establishing a stable government.

\

In conclusion, based on information from credible international
organizations piracy is a result of a nation in desperate need for
political and economic structure. Somalia has fallen victim to a
devastating natural disaster, illegal pollution of one more their most
valuable resources, and exploitation by surrounding, more developed
nations. Many of the people in Somalia feel helpless and see piracy as a
way to provide for themselves and their communities. This country will
continue to suffer from the perils of piracy as long as it continues to
lack a true state government and self-sustaining economy.

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

\

Bibliography

"Exclusives - Africa Related Business & Economics Publications." Africa
Economic Development Institute: Pirates of Somalia. 2016. Accessed
February 08, 2016.
[http://africaecon.org/index.php/exclusives/read\_exclusive/1/1](http://africaecon.org/index.php/exclusives/read_exclusive/1/1).

\

-   The Africa Economic Development Institute is a coalition of economic
    professors and analysts who perform research specifically in the
    continent of Africa in their areas of expertise and publish their
    findings.

\

Beloff, Jonathan R. "How Piracy Is Affecting Economic Development in
Puntland, Somalia." Journal of Strategic Security. 2013. Accessed
February 8, 2016.
[http://scholarcommons.usf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1222&context=jss](http://scholarcommons.usf.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1222&context=jss).

\

-   The *Journal of Strategic Security***(JSS) is a double-blind
    peer-reviewed professional journal published quarterly by
    [Henley-Putnam University](http://www.henley-putnam.edu/) with
    support from the [University of South Florida
    Libraries](http://www.lib.usf.edu/).

\

Mogadishu. "Ending Somali Piracy: Go After the System, Not Just the
Pirates." World Bank. 2011. Accessed February 08, 2016.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/04/11/ending-somali-piracy-go-after-the-system-not-just-the-pirates.

\

-   The World Bank is an international organization made up of five
    institutions whose mission is to end extreme poverty within a
    generation and boost-shared prosperity. They provide a newsletter to
    educate people on international economic issues.

\

Mohamed, Hamza. "Illegal Overfishing and the Return of Somalia's
Pirates." - Al Jazeera English. 2015. Accessed February 08, 2016.
[http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2015/10/illegal-overfishing-return-somalia-pirates-151006111159994.html](http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2015/10/illegal-overfishing-return-somalia-pirates-151006111159994.html).

\

-   Al Jazeera America is a part of the Al Jazeera media network, whose
    mission is to provide informative news to people no matter where
    they are. Their values include providing impartial, accurate, and
    comprehensive news stories about international issues.

\

Plaut, Martin. BBC News. 2005. Accessed February 08, 2016.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/4560246.stm.

\

-   The British Broadcasting Corporation is the world’s oldest national
    broadcasting organization that prides itself on delivering
    educational news in an unbiased way to the public. This specific web
    page provides an analysis on the economy of Puntland, Somalia that
    includes statistics from international organizations such as the
    United Nations.

\

"Report of the Secretary-General on the Protection of Somali Natural
Resources and Waters." Security Council United Nations Political Office
for Somalia. 2011. Accessed February 8, 2016.
https://unpos.unmissions.org/Portals/UNPOS/Repository UNPOS/S-2011-661
(25Oct).pdf.

\

-   The United Nations Security Council serves many purposes including
    investigating any disputes that may cause international friction.
    This specific web page provides access to a report conducted by them
    on the regulations of Somali waters.

\

Sterio, Milena. "Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia: The Argument for
Pirate Prosecutions in the National Courts of Kenya, the Seychelles, and
Mauritius." Milena Sterio. 2012. Accessed February 08, 2016.
http://poseidon01.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=613115082115015006103028113020066004105010020053060007069095010069005112002097118030098123043125040056029116110015126113094091048016013022088016112099116123119090051048056017126082076009030072123101125112023000075107122011096083087112028111122103082.

\

-   This paper is an accepted research paper published in 2012 by an
    associate professor of law at the Cleveland-Marshall College of Law,
    who was recently promoted to associate dean. Considered a maritime
    piracy law expert, Sterio has participated in meetings of the United
    Nations Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. She is a
    member of the Piracy Expert Group, an academic think tank
    functioning within the auspices of the Public International Law and
    Policy Group, and is one of six editors of the highly regarded
    IntLawGrrls blog.

\

"Lack of Effective Somali Government Root of Piracy Problem, Experts
Say." VOA. 2015. Accessed February 08, 2016.
http://www.voanews.com/content/a-13-2009-04-16-voa47-68733422/409931.html.

\

-   The Voice of America news outlet possesses a charter signed into law
    by President Gerald Ford in 1976 that states, “VOA will serve as a
    consistently reliable and authoritative source of news. VOA news
    will be accurate, objective, and comprehensive.”


